---
layout: post
title: !binary |-
  T3Blbldlc3QgMjAxMw==
created: 1367707026
---
OpenWest 2013 - I had the opportunity to go to this conference at UVU, and I learned a few things, was bored during some classes, but whatever. 

Just wanted to recap some of the funnest things I did or coolest things I learned. 

By far, the two best classes were the one about vim, and the one entitled "Linux Arcana". 

The Linux Arcana one was good, taught me a great learning strategy (as the wizard put it, "exploration strategy"). When I like a certain command and want to know more about it, it's a good idea then to find out which package provides that command. In debian: 

<pre><code>dpkg -S /path/to/command</code></pre>

So for instance if I like ls, I can head over and do this which will show me that it's part of the <pre>coreutils</pre> package: 

<pre><code>dpkg -S `which ls`</code></pre>

The following command shows me what coreutils is all about in the first place:
<pre><code>aptitude show coreutils</code></pre>

Then I could run this and find out just what is included with coreutils (a long list): 
<pre><code>dpkg -L coreutils</code</pre>

Those in the /bin and /usr/bin/ etc are commands that are available to me to use. Check man pages, etc etc etc... Seemed that RPM allowed me to know exactly which commands/tools though would be available to a certain package, not just the whole shablang that was included in it. 


Another thing I'd like to point out but don't fully understand is that there are 'info' pages included with some packages to give more detailed info about them and a system that can be used to search through and navigate through those. 

