---
title: Umask
tags: umask
updated: Mon May  8 15:08:26 2017
---

The `umask` command/utility is a bash builtin. It's used to check and/or alter the _file-creation mode mask_. 

## What's a Mode Mask?

A mode mask is just a little bit of information (an octal value) that defines what permissions a file or directory is set with when created. It's generally stored/set in octal form and follows the same rules as the `chmod` command in terms of read/write/execute permissions are specified. The big difference though is that the octal form is a _complement_. So if I wanted that new files be created with a permission of `755`, I would set a mask of `022`. 

## Default Mode Mask

Generally the default is set by the `umask` command being run in `/etc/profile`. This makes it so that the login shell picks it up, and everything forked from that login shell inherits the same mask. 

(I heard about a file at `/etc/login.defs` that has a value `UMASK 077` set within. Turns out that this only has to do with the shadow utilities that handle user/group management, nothing more. My guess is that when one of the shadow utilities has to create a file or a dir, it does so with a mask of 0077.)

## Usage

The two reasons to use `umask`: 

* find out what the current mask is
* set a new mask

### Determine Current Mask

Very basically, running `umask` with no arguments just spits out the octal form of the mode mask: 

~~~
$ umask
0002
~~~

You can check the _symbolic_ mask with `-S`: 

~~~
$ umask -S
u=rwx,g=rwx,o=rx
~~~

It's very worth noting that the _symbolic_ mask displays the permissions that the file or directory would be given upon creation. It's not a compliment. Only the _octal_ mask shows a compliment. The above two masks would both result in a file being created with 0755 permissions! 

### Set New Mask

Running `umask 0077` changes the mode. It doesn't confirm or anything, just provides a return value. 

Likewise, one could set the mask symbolically by using `umask u+rwx go-rwx` (again, following same rules that chmod uses)which will result in a mask value of `0077`. 


